WE HAVE TO COME UP WITH
A DIFFERENT KIND OF FUEL.
WE'RE GOING TO RUN OUT OF GAS.
THERE'S JUST NO QUESTION.
BIG COMPANIES, THEY'VE BEEN
REALLY PUSHING SINCE THE 1950s,
TRYING TO MAKE A COMMERCIAL
FUEL-CELL PRODUCT.
WE WOULD MAKE MORE ENERGY THAN
WE COULD EVER DREAM OF USING
AS A CIVILIZATION.
WHOA!
CANCER IS NO JOKE,
BUT TREATMENT IS WORSE.
THERE'S GOT TO BE
A BETTER WAY.
CANCER--WHAT DID I
KNOW ABOUT IT?
COULD WE INJECT A NANOPARTICLE
DRUG INTO A HUMAN?
IT'S JUST NOT A BUNCH OF NUMBERS
ON A PIECE OF PAPER.
IT'S REALLY PERSONAL.
FIRST IN A HUMAN, FIRST
PATIENT--IS IT GOING TO WORK?
"SURVIVAL," ON THIS EPISODE
OF "CURIOUS."
"CURIOUS" IS MADE POSSIBLE
BY TIAA-CREF.
WELCOME TO powerof.org.
WELCOME TO TIAA CREF.
WE'RE A $400 BILLION
FINANCIAL SERVICES .org
WITH THE HEART
OF A NONPROFIT,
SERVING THOSE
WHO SERVE THE GREATER GOOD.
WE ARE COMMITTED
TO PROVIDING THEM
HONEST, OBJECTIVE
RETIREMENT ADVICE.
THAT'S powerof.org.
THAT'S TIAA CREF.
Man: WE ARE ALL
SCIENTISTS.
EVERY ONE OF US
IS A SCIENTIST.
WE ARE DOING
THE BIGGEST EXPERIMENT
EVER.
THE EXPERIMENT IS TAKING
CARBON DIOXIDE LEVELS
TO A PLACE
THEY'VE NEVER BEEN
IN AT LEAST THE LAST
3/4 OF A MILLION YEARS.
THE DEBATES ARE NOT WHETHER
CO2 IS CONTRIBUTING
TO GLOBAL WARMING.
THE QUESTIONS ARE HOW MUCH
IS IT GOING TO CONTRIBUTE,
AND WHAT'S IT GOING TO DO?
THAT'S AN EXPERIMENT
WE MAY NOT WANT TO RUN.
IT'S CLEAR THAT WE HAVE
A LOOMING ENERGY CRISIS.
WE'VE BURNT THROUGH
HALF THE WORLD'S, YOU KNOW,
STORED ENERGY RESOURCES
FOR THE LAST
5 BILLION YEARS
IN, YOU KNOW,
BASICALLY 130.
WE'RE GOING TO
RUN OUT OF GAS.
THERE'S JUST NO QUESTION.
IT'S GOING TO RUN OUT.
WHICH IS GOING TO
GET US FIRST--
ARE WE GOING TO
RUN OUT OF OIL,
OR ARE WE GOING TO BURN ALL
THAT OIL AND MAKE ALL THAT CO2?
WE HAVE NO CHOICE BUT TO DO
THINGS DIFFERENTLY.
WE HAVE TO COME UP WITH
A DIFFERENT KIND OF FUEL.
WHEN HUMANS EXIST, WE ARE
GLOWING 100-WATT LIGHT BULBS.
A 2,000-CALORIE DIET PER DAY
IS EQUIVALENT TO US
GLOWING LIKE
A 100-WATT LIGHT BULB.
NOW, IT TAKES 10 TIMES
THE AMOUNT OF ENERGY
TO BRING THAT FOOD
FROM THE FARM
AND TO PUT IT INTO A TRUCK
AND PUT IT INTO A REFRIGERATOR
AND GET IT
INTO YOUR MOUTH.
IF YOU JUST ADD UP
THE ENERGY IT TAKES
TO PUT FOOD ON THE TABLE
AND EAT,
THAT'S ALREADY
10 TRILLION WATTS.
AND THEN WE ACTUALLY
HAVE TO DO OTHER THINGS
LIKE GET TO WORK,
LIKE TURN ON THE LIGHTS.
AS POPULATION GROWS,
WE'RE GOING TO NEED
BETWEEN 20 AND 25 TRILLION
WATTS OF ENERGY.
SO WHERE ARE WE GOING TO GET
20 TO 25 TRILLION WATTS
OF CARBON-FREE ENERGY
WITHIN OUR LIFETIMES?
Woman: WE CAN THINK ABOUT
LOTS OF RENEWABLES,
LIKE TIDAL AND WIND
AND GEOTHERMAL AND SO ON,
BUT THOSE ARE NOT SIGNIFICANT
ENERGY INPUTS.
Lewis: NUCLEAR COULD BE
A SLICE OF THIS PUZZLE.
BUT EVEN TO BE A SLICE...
WE WOULD HAVE TO BUILD
10,000 NUCLEAR REACTORS
OVER THE NEXT 50 YEARS.
Woman: DO WE WANT TO PUT
NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS
IN COUNTRIES THAT WE'RE ALREADY
SAYING, "DON'T DO THIS"?
Lewis: YOU COULD GET TO MAYBE
PIECING TOGETHER A LITTLE PUZZLE
THAT BARELY GETS YOU TO HALF
OF WHAT YOU MIGHT NEED,
BUT IF YOU WANT TO
BRIDGE THAT GAP,
WE NEED TO GO
TO THE SUN.
MORE ENERGY FROM THE SUN
HITS THE EARTH IN ONE HOUR
THAN ALL THE ENERGY CONSUMED
BY HUMANS ON OUR PLANET
IN AN ENTIRE YEAR.
THAT MEANS EVEN IF WE ONLY
TOOK A TINY FRACTION
OF WHAT HITS THE EARTH,
WE WOULD STILL MAKE MORE ENERGY
THAN WE COULD EVER DREAM
OF USING
AS A CIVILIZATION.
Haile: WE LOVE SOLAR BECAUSE
WE HAVE SO MUCH OF IT.
Man: THE ONLY SOLUTION
THAT SEEMS ABUNDANTLY CLEAR
IS TO SOMEHOW USE SUNLIGHT
TO POWER THE PLANET.
Lewis: THE PROBLEM WITH THE SUN
IS IT HAS THIS NASTY HABIT--
IT GOES OUT LOCALLY
EVERY SINGLE NIGHT.
AND PEOPLE NEED ENERGY
AT NIGHT, TOO.
SO UNLESS YOU CAN
STORE SUNLIGHT,
YOU CAN NEVER USE IT
TO MAKE PRIMARY ENERGY
FOR THE PEOPLE WHEN THEY NEED IT
AND WHERE THEY NEED IT.
SOLAR CELLS ARE ONE PART
OF THE SOLUTION.
SO SOLAR CELLS
PROVIDE ELECTRICITY.
BUT UNLESS WE STORE IT,
THAT MEANS WE CAN ONLY
PROVIDE PEOPLE ENERGY
BETWEEN 10 A.M.
AND 4 P.M.
ON A SUNNY DAY IN ARIZONA
OR IN CALIFORNIA.
[THUNDER]
WHAT HAPPENS WHEN IT
RAINS IN BOSTON?
[HORNS HONKING]
Man: THERE'S A BIG CHUNK
OF ENERGY
THAT WON'T BE DERIVED
FROM SOLAR CELLS.
BUT IT MIGHT BE DERIVED
FROM SOMETHING HOOKED UP TO,
YOU KNOW, SORT OF A CREATIVE
ADAPTATION OF SOLAR CELLS
THAT CAN ALSO BE USED
TO THEN MAKE FUEL.
Haile: WHAT THAT MEANS IS
TAKING THAT SOLAR ENERGY
AND CONVERTING IT
INTO A CHEMICAL FUEL
RATHER THAN CONVERTING IT
TO ELECTRICITY.
Peters: AND THAT FUEL IN ITS
SIMPLEST FORM IS HYDROGEN.
THE SUN ALREADY POWERS THE
PLANET THROUGH PHOTOSYNTHESIS,
AND WE ALL SEE THAT
EVERY DAY.
THE SUN SHINES
ON THE EARTH,
AND PLANTS TAKE SUNLIGHT,
WATER, AND CARBON DIOXIDE
AND TURN THAT INTO A FUEL.
IT SOUNDS PRETTY SIMPLE,
BUT THE MACHINERY
THAT THEY USE TO DO THAT
IS AN INCREDIBLY COMPLEX
CHEMICAL MACHINE.
THE QUESTION IS, CAN YOU EXTRACT
THE ESSENCE OF HOW IT WORKS
AND PROVIDE A FUEL SOURCE FOR
THE PLANET FOR THE LONG HAUL?
AND THAT WOULD BE A PRETTY COOL
PROBLEM TO SOLVE.
Lewis: WHAT WE'RE TRYING TO DO
IS ARTIFICIAL PHOTOSYNTHESIS,
IN ESSENCE, BUILD A MECHANICAL
VERSION OF A LEAF.
FIND A SYSTEM
THAT TAKES SUNLIGHT
AND WATER AS THE ONLY
TWO INPUTS,
AND OUT COMES HYDROGEN
AS THE FUEL.
Peters: IN ESSENCE,
TAKE H2O
AND STRIP THE HYDROGEN
OUT OF H2O,
WHICH TAKES ENERGY,
AND THE ENERGY TO PULL THAT H2
OUT OF H20 IS JUST SUNLIGHT.
THIS IS AN AREA THAT'S
REALLY CAUGHT IN BETWEEN
2 THINGS THAT PEOPLE
HEAR ABOUT ON THE STREET.
EVERYBODY'S SEEN SOLAR CELLS.
EVERYBODY'S SEEN PLANTS.
AND WE'RE TRYING
TO GET INTO
THE MIDDLE GROUND,
WHERE PEOPLE REALLY
HAVEN'T GONE BEFORE.
BECAUSE WE'RE NOT JUST TRYING
TO USE PLANTS AND MAKE FUEL.
WE'RE TRYING TO MAKE FUEL,
BUT WITH THE MATERIALS
THAT MAKE SOLAR CELLS.
THIS PROBLEM HAS
MANY PIECES TO IT.
THE FIRST IMPORTANT PIECE
IS TO TAKE THE SUNLIGHT
DIRECTLY BY ABSORBING IT
AND TO CONVERT ITS ENERGY
INTO ELECTRIC CHARGES.
AND THE THING THAT GIVES US
THAT ELECTRIC CHARGE
WILL BE SOME REALLY CHEAP
IMPLEMENTATION,
LIKE SOLAR PAINT.
THOSE PARTICLES
IN THAT PASTE
ARE THE PIGMENT
IN WHITE PAINT--TITANIA.
WHEN HE DRAGS
THAT SQUEEGEE
ACROSS THAT
SILK-SCREENING PRINTER,
SOME OF THOSE PARTICLES
GO THROUGH,
AND THEY'RE GOING TO MAKE
A FILM ONTO A GLASS SLIDE.
THE SECRET TO GET THIS
TO ABSORB SUNLIGHT
IS THIS DYE.
WE TAKE THAT WHITE PAINT
AND DUNK IT INTO A SOLUTION
THAT GETS SUCKED
ONTO THAT WHITE MATERIAL
AND MAKES IT COLORED.
AND THIS DYE, ON THIS SMALL,
TINY TITANIA PARTICLE
CAN TAKE THE ENERGY
FROM SUNLIGHT,
CAPTURE THAT ENERGY,
AND IT PRODUCES ELECTRICITY.
AND IT'S REALLY CHEAP.
Peters: SO WHAT
WE WANT TO BUILD
IS AN ARTIFICIAL
PHOTOSYNTHESIS DEVICE
THAT HAS 4 COMPONENTS.
IT HAS SUNLIGHT, A MEMBRANE,
CATALYSTS, AND WATER.
WHAT YOU WANT TO DO
IS SPLIT WATER.
AND SO YOU NEED CATALYSTS
THAT FACILITATE
SPLITTING WATER.
A CATALYST IS SOMETHING TH
HAPPEN FASTER,R.
SO LET'S SAY YOU'RE
SITTING THERE IN BED
AND YOU NEED TO GO TO SCHOOL,
AND YOUR MOM COMES IN
AND TELLS YOU,
"GET OUT OF BED,
BECAUSE YOU NEED
TO GO TO SCHOOL."
THAT'S THE CATALYST
DURING THAT SCENARIO. OK?
THIS IS SOMETHING THAT WAS
GOING TO HAPPEN ANYWAY
BUT JUST NEEDED
TO BE SPEEDED UP.
SO THAT'S WHAT
THE CATALYST DOES.
Peters: WHEN YOU SPLIT WATER,
YOU REMOVE ELECTRONS AND PROTONS
FROM WATER, AND THOSE
PROTONS AND ELECTRONS
FLOW ACROSS THE MEMBRANE
AND GET RECOMBINED
ON THE OTHER SIDE
OF THE MEMBRANE
TO FORM HYDROGEN.
THAT IS YOUR ULTIMATE
FUEL SOURCE.
YOU CAN THINK OF THAT DEVICE
AS BUBBLE WRAP...
THAT YOU WOULD JUST GET
FROM THE HARDWARE STORE
WITH THE SOLAR PAINT IN IT...
UNROLL THE BUBBLE WRAP
ON YOUR ROOF,
FEED IN WATER, AND OUT WILL COME
HYDROGEN AS THE FUEL.
THESE SYSTEMS--YOU'D
PUT THEM ON A FARM,
YOU COULD PUT THEM ON TOP
OF A FACTORY BUILDING,
PUT THEM ALL OVER
THE PLACE
TO GENERATE ALL OF OUR ENERGY
FOREVER FROM THE SUN.
Haile: SO WE'VE GOT
HYDROGEN AS A FUEL.
WELL, WHAT DO WE
DO WITH IT?
THAT'S WHERE
FUEL CELLS COME IN.
SO WE GOT SOLAR ENERGY
INTO OUR ADVANCED SOLAR
PANELS OF THE FUTURE.
THEY GIVE US, THEN,
THE FUEL, WHICH IS HYDROGEN.
WE THEN TAKE THAT FUEL,
AND WE PUT IT
INTO THIS OTHER BOX,
AND OUT COMES ELECTRICITY.
THAT BOX IS CALLED
A FUEL CELL.
[BELL DINGING]
SO IT'S LIKE A BATTERY,
IN THE SENSE THAT YOU
PUT YOUR LEADS ON THERE
AND YOU GET ELECTRICITY,
JUST LIKE
IN YOUR CAR BATTERY.
BUT IT'S LIKE
A COMBUSTION ENGINE
IN THE SENSE
THAT YOU PUT FUEL IN.
Haile: FUEL CELLS ARE DEFINITELY
NOT A NEW TECHNOLOGY.
IT'S OVER A HUNDRED YEARS
SINCE THEY'VE BEEN NOW.
SAME TIME AS BATTERIES,
SORT OF THE ELECTRIC CHEMISTRY
WAS UNDERSTOOD.
IN FACT, THE FIRST FUEL CELL
WAS INVENTED IN 1839
BY SIR WILLIAM GROVE,
AND SINCE THEN, PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
WORKING ON FUEL CELLS A LOT.
INSIDE OF IT ESSENTIALLY
IS 2 CHAMBERS--
THE FUEL CHAMBER
AND THEN THE AIR CHAMBER.
SO WE HAVE HYDROGEN HERE,
WE HAVE OXYGEN HERE,
AND WE KEEP THEM
SEPARATED BY A MEMBRANE.
NOW, HERE YOU POTENTIALLY
HAVE WATER, H2O,
LIKE BOYS AND GIRLS
AT A HIGH-SCHOOL DANCE,
THEY REALLY WANT
TO GET BACK TOGETHER.
THIS MEMBRANE IS
BASICALLY JUST A SHEET
OF A SPECIAL MATERIAL.
AND THE WAY THAT
OUR MATERIAL WORKS
IS THAT THIS MEMBRANE IS WHAT'S
CALLED A PROTON CONDUCTOR.
ONLY PROTONS CAN GO ACROSS,
NOTHING ELSE.
WELL, KEEP IN MIND THAT HYDROGEN
REALLY IS JUST A PROTON
PLUS AN ELECTRON.
IF THAT HYDROGEN CAN
DROP OFF ITS ELECTRON,
IT CAN NOW BECOME
A PROTON
THAT CAN GET THROUGH
THE MEMBRANE.
BUT BASICALLY, WHEN THE ELECTRON
WANTS TO GO THROUGH,
IT'S, "NO. NO, YOU CAN'T
COME THROUGH HERE."
SO THE ELECTRONS GO THROUGH
SOME EXTERIOR CIRCUIT,
AND ON THEIR WAY, WE MAKE THEM
DO SOME WORK FOR US.
YOU'VE GOT TO TURN ON
MY LIGHT BULB.
OK? YOU GOT TO
MAKE MY COMPUTER WORK.
YOU GOT TO MAKE
MY TV WORK.
MY STEREO WORK.
YOU GOT TO TURN ON
THE HEATER.
NOW THE ELECTRONS GO AROUND,
AND AT THE SAME TIME,
THE PROTONS ARE MAKING THEIR WAY
ACROSS THE MEMBRANE,
AND THEN ON THE OTHER SIDE
OF THE MEMBRANE,
THE ELECTRONS, THE PROTONS,
THE OXYGEN ALL MEET TOGETHER,
AND WE PRODUCE WATER
AS A BY-PRODUCT.
IF HYDROGEN IS USED
AS THE FUEL INPUT,
THEN THE EXHAUST
IS PURE, CLEAN WATER.
WE WOULD ABSOLUTELY NOT BE
ADDING TO GLOBAL WARMING
IN THAT SCENARIO.
IF YOU TAKE A LOOK
AT A FUEL CELL,
ESSENTIALLY IT ALL
BOILS DOWN TO--
WHAT IS THIS MEMBRANE
MATERIAL MADE OUT OF, OK?
WE WERE ACTUALLY
SOSSINA'S FIRST
2 GRAD STUDENTS,
NUMBER ONE
AND NUMBER TWO.
SHE SHOWED US THESE
PARTICULAR MATERIALS
THAT HAVE WHAT ARE CALLED
SUPERPROTONIC PHASE TRANSITIONS.
AND I WAS, LIKE, "WHOA!"
IT'S A NEW CLASS
OF MATERIALS,
WHICH HAS NEVER BEEN
INVESTIGATED BEFORE.
IT'S SUPERPROTONIC.
THAT'S ALL
I NEED TO KNOW.
THAT WAS THE SELLING
POINT, FOR SURE.
AND THEN, YOU KNOW,
WE REALLY WORKED ON
UNDERSTANDING
THE THERMODYNAMICS
THAT MAKE THESE MATERIALS
DO WHAT THEY DO.
AND WE ACTUALLY TOOK
THE MATERIALS,
SMASHED THEM TOGETHER TO MAKE
THIS SPECIAL MEMBRANE,
AND CREATED ELECTRICITY
FROM HYDROGEN.
AND RIGHT NOW, WE'RE
DEFINITELY DOING THIS
IN A CRUDE MANNER,
BUT THIS IS ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT WE HAVE TO DO
TO BASICALLY MAKE THIS
A HIGHLY REFINED
COMMERCIAL PROCESS.
SO YOU'RE BASICALLY
MAKING A SANDWICH--
MEMBRANE, AND THEN WE HAVE
HYDROGEN ELECTRODE
AND OXYGEN ELECTRODE, OK?
THINK OF THEM
AS PIECES OF THE BREAD.
AND WE'VE JUST
SMASHED IT ALL TOGETHER.
GO, BESSIE.
HA HA HA.
THIS IS BESSIE,
BESSIE THE PRESS.
SHE DOES
ALL OUR HARD WORK.
Chisholm: BIG COMPANIES,
THEY'VE BEEN REALLY PUSHING
SINCE THE LATE 1950s TO MAKE
A COMMERCIAL FUEL CELL PRODUCT.
WHY DON'T WE HAVE ONE?
WELL, THE PROBLEM IS
THAT ESSENTIALLY...
THAT SPECIAL MATERIAL,
THAT MEMBRANE.
MANY DIFFERENT TYPES
OF MEMBRANES THEY'VE USED,
BUT THEY ALL HAD BASICALLY
AN ACHILLES HEEL,
EITHER NOT BEING
VERY DURABLE
OR MAYBE HAVING
VERY LOW PERFORMANCE OR--
AND THIS IS THE ONE THAT
PRETTY MUCH KILLS THEM ALL--
COSTING WAY TOO MUCH.
OURS IS THE FIRST
NEW TYPE OF MEMBRANE
IN HALF A CENTURY.
OUR MISSION IS TO GET
OUR FUEL CELLS, YOU KNOW,
INTO EVERY HOUSEHOLD.
ONE CELL WOULD POWER MAYBE
YOUR PORTABLE CELL PHONE.
BUT IF YOU WANT MORE POWER,
YOU PUT THOSE CELLS TOGETHER
IN WHAT'S CALLED A STACK.
AND THAT STACK THEN GETS PUT
INTO YOUR FUEL CELL GENERATOR
AND GENERATES ELECTRICITY
FOR YOUR HOME.
YOU CAN USE IT
IN YOUR CAR
OR AT YOUR LOCAL
POWER PLANT
TO GIVE POWER
TO YOUR CITY.
Peters: LEARNING HOW
TO TAKE WATER
TO A STORABLE CHEMICAL FUEL
VIA SUNLIGHT
IS PROBABLY THE GRAND CHALLENGE
OF THE 21st CENTURY.
WE'RE TRYING TO REALLY
BRIDGE THAT GAP
BETWEEN INNOVATION
AND COMMERCIALIZATION.
IT'S ONE THING
TO MAKE IT IN THE LAB.
IT'S ANOTHER THING TO
MAKE THOUSANDS OF THEM
REPRODUCIBLY
FOR COMMERCIAL PRODUCTS.
I'M HOPEFUL
WE'LL FIGURE IT OUT,
BUT WE WON'T
FIGURE OUT SOMETHING
THAT WILL BE WORKABLE
IN THE SHORT-TERM FUTURE.
THIS IS A LONG-TERM GOAL.
WE WILL INDEED
HAVE TO USE FOSSIL FUELS.
WE'RE GOING TO USE IT
FOR THE NEXT 20 OR 30 YEARS,
BECAUSE THESE SOLUTIONS
AREN'T HAPPENING
IN A TIME FRAME
FASTER THAN THAT.
Lewis: WE'VE GOT TO KEEP
PLUGGING AWAY AT THIS PROBLEM
WITH THE SMARTEST PEOPLE
WE'VE GOT
TO SEE IF WE CAN SEE
OUR WAY CLEAR.
Peters: I MEAN,
IF YOU WANT TO TALK ABOUT
SECURITY FOR
THE UNITED STATES,
WELL, HOW ABOUT MAKING
THE UNITED STATES
TOTALLY
ENERGY-INDEPENDENT
AND DOING IT IN A WAY
THAT DOESN'T HARM
THE GLOBE AND IMPACT
GLOBAL WARMING?
IT DOESN'T MATTER HOW LONG
IT'S GOING TO TAKE.
IT'S SOMETHING WE HAVE TO DO,
BECAUSE IF WE DON'T DO IT,
THE CONSEQUENCES
ARE TOO DIRE.
WE'RE ON OUR WAY
TO CITY OF HOPE NOW,
AND IT'S ALMOST 9:30
IN THE MORNING.
THE PATIENT SHOULD BE ARRIVING
AT CITY OF HOPE AS WELL.
[WATER RUNNING]
OH, IT WAS
A FAIRLY RESTLESS NIGHT,
BUT I JUST KEPT ROLLING
THROUGH IN MY MIND
ABOUT THIS NEW
NANOPARTICLE DRUG.
DID WE DO
EVERYTHING RIGHT?
YOU KNOW, WE PREPARED.
EVERYTHING IS READY TO GO.
BUT IT'S STILL,
YOU KNOW,
THE FIRST TIME
IN THE FIRST HUMAN.
BYE.
THIS MORNING
REMINDED ME A LOT--
I WAS A TRACK RUNNER.
IT'S KIND OF THAT, YOU KNOW,
YOU GET UP IN THE MORNING
WHEN THERE'S
A BIG COMPETITION,
AND YOU KIND OF HAVE
THAT JITTERS...
THAT CAUTIOUS NERVOUSNESS.
[INDISTINCT CONVERSATION]
DR. YEN ARRIVED
WAY BEFORE I DID.
HE'S THE ONE
WHO HAS TO MAKE SURE
THAT THE TRIAL RUNS THE WAY
IT'S SUPPOSED TO RUN.
Yen: EVERYBODY'S EXCITED.
THERE IS SOME ANXIETY.
I DID MENTION TO MY WIFE
ANTY
FOR ME, TOO.
WHO'S YOUR PROTOCOL NURSE?
IS IT MARY?
YES.
I'M 53 YEARS OLD.
IN THE YEAR 2002,
THEY DIAGNOSED ME WITH CANCER.
YOU ARE TOO QUICK
TO WANT TO JAB ON ME.
2002 WAS AN IMPORTANT YEAR
BECAUSE I GOT MARRIED.
OK,
AND BREATHE OUT.
AND 2 MONTHS LATER,
THEY DIAGNOSED ME
WITH PANCREATIC CANCER.
AND IT'S OVER
IN A JIFF.
I HAD THE SURGERY,
AND FOR ABOUT A YEAR
AND A HALF, I WAS OK.
AND THEN IT CAME BACK AGAIN,
AND NOW IT'S IN A LUNG.
I WAS TAKING CHEMO.
IT WORKED FOR ABOUT 6 MONTHS,
AND THEN IT DID NOT WORK
ON MY CANCER,
PARTICULAR CANCER.
SO I WAS SUGGESTED
TO GO IN A STUDY.
Davis: THE PHASE-ONE TRIAL
IS ALL ABOUT SAFETY.
PEOPLE WHO GO
INTO THESE TRIALS,
YOU HAVE TO GIVE THEM
A LOT OF CREDIT.
THEY HAVE NO IDEA
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN.
THIS IS YOUR FIRST TIME
YOU'RE PUTTING THIS NEW THING
INTO A HUMAN.
HOW SAFE IS IT?
OK.
SO, HOW ARE YOU DOING?
I'M DOING FINE.
Yen: HE UNDERSTANDS
THAT THE STANDARD TREATMENT
PROBABLY MAY NOT BENEFIT HIM
ANYTHING MORE.
SO HE'S WILLING
TO TRY ANYTHING NEW.
THIS IS A NEW THING,
AND LOTS OF STORIES
AND INVENTION BEHIND THAT,
AND DR. MARK DID
THE RESEARCH FOR 10 YEARS.
SO THIS IS
AN EXCITING MOMENT.
HE'S SHARING THE SAME
EXCITEMENT AS US.
MINE'S HIGH. MY BLOOD
PRESSURE IS HIGH.
I'M LOOKING FORWARD
TO SEE WHAT IT DOES
TO A HUMAN BODY,
TO MY BODY,
AND THIS HOPEFULLY
WILL WORK.
Yen: ABOUT 11:25,
WE START TO INFUSE
THE IT-101 NANOPARTICLE
TO OUR VERY FIRST PATIENT.
Davis: I WAS CONSTANTLY
WATCHING THE MONITORS,
WATCHING HIM.
FIRST IN HUMANS, YOU NEVER KNOW
WHAT'S GOING TO HAPPEN.
DO YOU HAVE
ANY PAIN?
NO.
A HEADACHE?
ANY ITCH?
NO. NOTHING.
Yen: FOR THERAPEUTIC
RESEARCH,
WE ARE ALWAYS FACING
SO MUCH UNCERTAINTIES
BECAUSE THAT'S SO NEW.
Davis: YOU GO DOWN
IN A LAB AND CREATE
A LITTLE BIT
OF THIS STUFF.
BUT IT'S JUST EXCEEDINGLY RARE
TO BE A FACULTY MEMBER
AT A UNIVERSITY AND TO BE
SITTING THERE
CHATTING WITH
THE FIRST PATIENT.
SO, YOU KNOW, YOU
WENT ALL THE WAY
THROUGH THE TRIAL.
IT'S REALLY PERSONAL NOW.
IT'S JUST NOT A BUNCH OF NUMBERS
ON A PIECE OF PAPER.
TREMENDOUS EXCITEMENT
TO GET IT IN THAT DAY
AND NOT SEE THAT WE WERE
HAVING ANY PROBLEMS.
BUT THE QUESTION IS REALLY...
IS IT GOING TO WORK?
10 YEARS WAS A LONG TIME
TO GET INTO PATIENTS,
AND NOW THAT YOU'RE
THERE, YOU KNOW,
YOU'RE IN A HURRY,
YOU WANT TO SEE IT.
YOU WANT TO SEE WHETHER
WE WERE GOING TO HAVE
ANY EFFECTS ON THE TUMOR.
BUT THAT'S THE ONE THING
CANCER TEACHES YOU,
IS IT TEACHES YOU
TO BE PATIENT.
IN NINTH GRADE, I RAN
THE FASTEST TIME IN THE COUNTRY
FOR THE 400, WHICH IS
ONE LAP AROUND.
AND SO FROM THAT TIME,
THE ONLY THING I WORRIED ABOUT
WAS I WANTED TO GET AROUND
THAT TRACK FASTER THAN
ANYBODY ELSE IN THE COUNTRY,
BUT WHEN I GOT TO COLLEGE,
IT JUST SEEMED LIKE,
FOR A LITTLE GUY LIKE ME,
I WAS OK, BUT I WASN'T
WORLD-CLASS.
I KNEW AT SOME POINT IN TIME,
I WAS GOING TO
HAVE TO QUIT THAT
AND ACTUALLY GO GET
A REAL JOB.
I'M A CHEMICAL ENGINEER.
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING
IS KIND OF A MARRIAGE
OF CHEMISTRY
AND MATHEMATICS.
I REMEMBER WHEN I
STARTED AS A STUDENT,
I SAID, "WELL,
THAT'S KIND OF COOL.
I WANT TO DO
BOTH OF THOSE THINGS."
THEN WHEN I HEARD
IT'S USUALLY
THE MOST CHALLENGING
DISCIPLINE ON CAMPUS,
I SAID, "THAT'S FOR ME."
I CHOSE TO GO
THE RESEARCH PATHWAY.
OVER THE YEARS,
WE'VE BUILT THINGS
LIKE CRYSTALS
AND POLYMERS,
AND THEY'RE USED IN A VARIETY
OF DIFFERENT APPLICATIONS,
SUCH AS PLASTICS.
TODAY WE WOULD CALL THIS
NANOTECHNOLOGY.
BACK THEN, WE REALLY
DIDN'T HAVE A NAME FOR IT.
THIS ONE IS BETTER.
IF SOMEONE HAD SAID
10 YEARS AGO
THAT MY EXPERIENCE
AS A CHEMICAL ENGINEER
WOULD HELP ME COME UP
WITH A NEW CANCER TREATMENT,
I WOULD HAVE SAID NO WAY.
I HAD A SUCCESSFUL CAREER.
YOU KNOW, I HAD
A BIG RESEARCH PROGRAM.
EVERYTHING WAS
GOING ALONG FINE.
BUT THAT WAS BEFORE
WHAT HAPPENED TO MY WIFE.
Woman: SO I WAS PUTTING
ON SOME DRESSES,
AND MY LUMP WAS
WAY UNDER MY ARM,
AND IT WASN'T A LUMP
ON MY BREAST.
IT WAS JUST A LUMP
UNDER MY ARM,
AND YOU COULD
HARDLY FEEL IT.
I WENT TO THE DOCTOR,
AND THEY DID A NEEDLE BIOPSY.
I GOT A PHONE CALL FROM
THE DOCTOR SAYING IT'S CANCER.
AND IT JUST TOTALLY,
TOTALLY SHOCKED ME.
I HAD TWIN BOYS WHO WERE 3
AND STILL IN DIAPERS,
AND I HAD A DAUGHTER
WHO WAS 5 AND IN KINDERGARTEN.
AND YOU THINK ABOUT
HOW OLD THEY'RE GOING TO BE
WHEN YOU DIE.
I MEAN, MARK CAME HOME,
IMMEDIATELY CANCELED EVERYTHING
THAT HE HAD ON HIS DOCKET.
Mark: YOU GO FROM BEING
SOMEONE WHO'S A CONTROL--
WE'RE ALL CONTROL FREAKS;
BELIEVE ME, EVERY FACULTY MEMBER
IS A CONTROL FREAK--
TO ACTUALLY HAVING EVERYTHING
TAKEN OUT OF YOUR CONTROL.
YOU KNOW, YOUR NICE
COMFORTABLE LIFE
GETS, YOU KNOW,
ALL OF A SUDDEN DESTROYED.
Mary: WITHIN A 2-WEEK PERIOD,
I HAD GONE THROUGH
ALL KINDS OF TESTS
AND HAD A MASTECTOMY.
AND THEN THE THIRD
DOCTOR I SAW
JUST RECOMMENDED A REALLY,
REALLY AGGRESSIVE
FORM OF CHEMOTHERAPY.
I HAD A DRUG
CALLED ADRIAMYCIN,
AND IT'S NICKNAMED
"THE RED DEATH."
AND THAT'S WHAT
IT REALLY FELT LIKE.
I WOULD LAY IN BED AND THROW UP
CONTINUOUSLY FOR 2 DAYS,
NOT EAT, HAIR LOSS.
YOU'RE MORE SUSCEPTIBLE
TO INFECTION.
I MEAN, YOU JUST GET SO WEAK.
Mark: YOUR FOCUS TURNS INTO
BATTLING THE TREATMENT.
WHAT YOU'RE TRYING TO DO
IS SURVIVE THE TREATMENTS.
Mary: IT'S REALLY HARD TO GO
INTO A DOCTOR'S OFFICE
AND TO PUT SOMETHING
IN YOUR VEINS
THAT YOU KNOW IS
GOING TO MAKE YOU SICK.
YEAH, THINKING
ABOUT IT NOW,
JUST, YOU KNOW, BRINGING UP
THESE MEMORIES, I...
YOU LIKE TO THINK THERE'S
A REASON FOR EVERYTHING,
AND SOMETIMES
I LIKE TO THINK
THAT THERE'S A REASON
THAT I GOT SICK.
WHEN I WAS LITERALLY
THROWING UP EVERY DAY,
ALMOST EVERY HOUR
FOR A WHOLE MONTH.
I WOULD TURN
TO HIM AND SAY,
"MARK, THERE'S GOT TO BE
A BETTER WAY.
"YOU KNOW, YOU'VE
GOT TO FIND OUT
"HOW TO HAVE THE TREATMENT,
GET RID OF THE CANCER,
BUT NOT GO THROUGH
ALL THESE SIDE EFFECTS."
Mark: WHEN SHE SAID,
"THERE HAS TO BE A BETTER WAY,"
THAT WAS REALLY
THE TURNING POINT.
CANCER--WHAT DID
I KNOW ABOUT IT?
IT WAS WAY OUT
OF MY COMFORT ZONE
FROM A SCIENTIFIC
POINT OF VIEW.
MARY SAID, "WELL, WHAT KIND
OF EXCUSE IS THAT?
"YOU PEOPLE OVER AT CALTECH
ARE SMART.
"YOU GUYS
HAVE A HISTORY
"OF BEING ABLE TO SOLVE
SIGNIFICANT PROBLEMS.
YOU KNOW, WHY DON'T YOU
WORK ON IT?"
EASIER SAID THAN DONE.
Ray: CANCER IS NO JOKE,
BUT TREATMENT IS WORSE.
AT THE BEGINNING
OF THE CANCER,
I TOOK ABOUT
3 MONTHS CHEMO.
MORE OR LESS, YOU'RE WALKING
LIKE A LIVING ZOMBIE.
IT WAS HELL ON EARTH FOR ME.
CHEMO WASN'T WORKING.
MY CELLS WAS DOUBLING.
MY CANCER WAS
SPREADING SO FAST.
I'M IN ONE DAY FOR CHEMO,
SO I ASKED THE ONCOLOGIST,
"WHY AM I GOING THROUGH THIS
WHEN IT'S NOT WORKING?"
WELL, THEY FOUND IT HARD
TO BREAK IT TO ME, BUT I KNEW.
THEY TOLD ME
2 TO 6 MONTHS.
THE WAY I WAS FEELING,
I KNEW THAT I WOULDN'T EVEN
LAST 6 MONTHS.
AND I JUST WENT HOME
WITH MY WIFE,
AND I THOUGHT ABOUT SPENDING
A COUPLE OF MONTHS,
WHAT I HAVE
WITH MY WIFE.
AND I WAS MORE CONCERNED
ABOUT HER WELL-BEING,
MY MOTHER'S WELL-BEING.
I CALLED MY CHILDREN FROM
NEW ZEALAND, FROM AUSTRALIA.
EVERYBODY CAME THAT TIME.
SO IT WAS TIME TO ORGANIZE
EVERYTHING FOR THEM
SO THAT THEY DON'T SUFFER
AFTER I'M GONE.
ABOUT 2 MONTHS,
2 1/2 MONTHS PASS,
AND MY ONCOLOGIST
CALLED ME.
HE ASKED ME IF I WANTED
TO JOIN A STUDY.
TO TELL YOU THE TRUTH,
I WASN'T HOPEFUL
THAT IT'S GOING TO HELP ME.
BUT AT LEAST IT WILL
HELP SOMEBODY ELSE.
AND YOUR LAST NAME?
NATHA. N-A-T-H-A.
OK. AND DO YOU HAVE
AN ARM BAND ON?
NO, I HAVEN'T.
OK. LET ME
GET YOU ONE.
OK. HAVE A SEAT,
AND I'LL LET THEM
KNOW YOU'RE HERE, OK?
THANK YOU.
HA HA HA!
NOW, WHEN I GOT TO HOSPITAL,
VERY FIRST TREATMENT,
THEY'RE LOCKING EVERYBODY ELSE
IN A SMALL ROOM--
NURSES, DOCTORS,
EVERYBODY CHECKING.
I WAS SECOND, AND THEY WERE
TAKING BLOOD, WHAT,
EVERY HALF AN HOUR?
ONLY IN TIME I LEARNED,
"YOU ARE THE FIRST ONE."
BY THEN I WAS ALREADY
UNDER THE TREATMENT.
I KNEW
THAT IT WAS A STUDY,
BUT I THOUGHT SOMEBODY
MUST BE BEFORE ME.
IT WAS A HAIR-RAISING MOMENT.
IF THE MEDICATION
OR SOMETHING GOES WRONG,
I FORGOT TO SAY GOOD-BYE
TO MY WIFE.
IF THEY'D TOLD ME,
I WOULD HAVE DONE IT,
PUT MY LIVING TRUST PROPERLY,
CALL MY CHILDREN
THE NIGHT BEFORE, AND THEN GO.
Man: THIS TRIAL IS
REALLY ABOUT SEEING
WHAT IS IT LIKE TO INJECT
A NANOPARTICLE-CONTAINING DRUG
INTO A HUMAN.
Mary: DR. FORMAN WAS MY DOCTOR
AT THE CITY OF HOPE.
MARK JUST STARTED
TALKING TO HIM,
AND THAT'S HOW
IT ALL STARTED.
Forman: WHILE MARY WAS HERE
AT CITY OF HOPE
UNDERGOING
A REALLY PROLONGED
AND INTENSIVE
AND HARSH TREATMENT,
MARK WOULD GO
TO THE LIBRARY
UNBEKNOWNST TO ANY OF US
AND BEGAN TO STUDY
WHAT WE KNEW,
NAMELY ABOUT CANCER.
Mark: THE THING
IN BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE,
THE LITERATURE
IS ENORMOUS.
IT'S LIKE THE NIAGARA FALLS.
IF YOU WANTED TO TRY
TO GET A DRINK AND YOU WERE
UNDERNEATH NIAGARA FALLS,
HOW WOULD YOU DO THAT?
BECAUSE IT WOULD JUST,
YOU KNOW, FLOOD YOU TO DEATH.
Forman: WHAT HE WAS REALLY AFTER
WAS TO SEE
WHETHER WHAT HE WAS EXPERT AT
COULD BE USED TO DEVELOP
A BETTER APPROACH
TO TREATING CANCER.
THERE WAS A POINT AT WHICH
HE ANNOUNCED HIS INTENTIONS
IN A VERY QUIET,
UNDERSTATED WAY.
Mark: STEVE CAME OVER
TO MY OFFICE AT CALTECH,
AND WE WENT ON THE WHITEBOARD
AND STARTED WORKING ON THINGS.
Forman: I REMEMBER
VERY DISTINCTLY
HIS DRAWING ON THE BOARD--
THE NANOPARTICLE.
I KNEW I HAD TO FIGURE OUT
HOW TO MAKE A DRUG
DO 2 MAJOR THINGS--
FIRST, IT HAD TO BE EFFECTIVE
AGAINST THE CANCER,
AND SECOND, IT HAD TO HAVE
MINIMAL SIDE EFFECTS.
THE MAIN REASON
CONVENTIONAL CHEMO DRUGS,
LIKE THE ONE MARY TOOK,
CAUSE SO MANY OF THESE
AWFUL SIDE EFFECTS
IS BECAUSE THEY'RE MADE UP
OF TINY MOLECULES,
SO TINY THAT THEY TRAVEL
THROUGH YOUR BLOODSTREAM,
AND THEY LEAK OUT
OF YOUR BLOOD VESSELS
TO GO ALL OVER
YOUR BODY.
SO THE STUFF YOU'RE TAKING
TO KILL THE CANCER CELLS
ALSO THEN CAN KILL
HEALTHY CELLS.
BUT NANOPARTICLES ARE HUGE.
COMPARE THAT TO, SAY,
A MOLECULE
OF A CONVENTIONAL CHEMO DRUG,
YOU CAN REALLY
SEE THE DIFFERENCE.
IT-101, SINCE IT'S
A NANOPARTICLE,
IS TOO BIG TO LEAK OUT
OF NORMAL BLOOD VESSELS
AND GO INTO
THESE HEALTHY TISSUES.
AND SO HOPEFULLY
THAT WILL HELP ALLEVIATE
SOME OF THESE
SIDE EFFECTS.
THE THING IS, TUMORS DON'T HAVE
NORMAL BLOOD VESSELS.
WHEN TUMORS GET BIGGER
THAN A FEW MILLIMETERS,
WHICH IS ABOUT THE THICKNESS
OF A CREDIT CARD,
NOW THEY NEED
NEW BLOOD VESSELS
TO BE ABLE TO CONTINUE TO GROW
AND GET MORE NUTRIENTS.
THEY'RE SMART, AND THEY
SEND OUT SIGNALS SAYING,
"GROW ME SOME NEW
BLOOD VESSELS.
"BRING ME SOME MORE FOOD
SO I CAN CONTINUE
TO GROW AND GROW."
SO THESE NEW BLOOD VESSELS
ARE STRANGE.
THEY ARE CHAOTIC. THEY'RE NOT
LIKE OUR NORMAL BLOOD VESSELS,
AND THEY HAVE
BIG HOLES IN THEM
THAT ALLOW THINGS LIKE IT-101
TO ESCAPE OUT OF THEM.
OUR EXPECTATION IS, ONCE IT-101
GETS INSIDE OF A CANCER CELL,
IT'S A DONE DEAL.
IT'S ALL OVER
FOR THE CANCER CELL.
Forman: I WAS CONVINCED.
YOU KNOW, WHAT HE THOUGHT OF,
WHAT HE DREW ON THE BOARD,
THERE'S SOMETHING HERE,
AND WE'VE GOT TO DO IT,
WE'VE GOT TO FIND OUT.
Ray: SO I DID CHECK IN.
ARE MY FOLDERS HERE?
MY DREAM IS TO TRAVEL.
IT'S THE BIGGEST DREAM--
TO TRAVEL
THE TRANS-ALASKAN HIGHWAY,
TO GO TO ALASKA,
ANCHORAGE, ALASKA.
I WAS JUST PREPARING FOR THAT,
AND THE CANCER CAME,
AND I COULDN'T DO IT.
SO I'M WAITING FOR NOW,
HOPING THAT IF THIS WORKS,
THIS IS MY DREAM.
Woman: HI.
COME ON IN.
HI. THANKS.
A C.T. SCAN TODAY?
YES.
Mark: AS THE 2-MONTH MARK
WAS APPROACHING,
RAY WAS GOING TO GO IN
FOR HIS SCANS.
I REALLY WANTED TO SEE
THE RESULTS.
THE MACHINE'S
GOING TO BE TELLING YOU
TO TAKE A DEEP BREATH IN
AND HOLD IT.
AND EVERYONE WAS TELLING ME
TO STAY CALM, STAY CALM,
THAT YOU WOULDN'T EXPECT
TO SEE SOMETHING
THIS EARLY
IN A CLINICAL TRIAL.
YOU KNOW, THE FIRST IN HUMAN,
FIRST PATIENT, LOWEST DOSE,
BUT I WANTED TO SEE IT
REAL BAD.
YEAH.
GOOD.
SO, ANY PAIN?
NO. NO PAIN,
NOTHING.
FEELING
VERY NICE.
THE GOOD NEWS WAS
WE WEREN'T SEEING SIDE EFFECTS.
BUT IN THE BACK
OF MY MIND,
I'M REALLY WORRIED
THAT, GREAT,
MAYBE WE HAVE SOMETHING
THAT DOESN'T HAVE SIDE EFFECTS,
BUT IT ALSO DOESN'T DO
ANYTHING TO THE TUMOR.
EXCELLENT.
THIS IS THE C.T. SCAN
DONE SEPTEMBER 15,
AND A RADIOLOGIST
HAS INTERPRETED THAT
AND COMPARED IT
TO THE PREVIOUS C.T. SCAN
DONE BEFORE THE TREATMENT.
AND WE ARE
VERY GLAD TO SEE
THERE IS A NOTHING
PROGRESS AT ALL.
THERE IS NO...
ANY LESION BECOME BIGGER.
THAT'S VERY GOOD. YEAH.
A C.T. SCAN SHOWED
THAT ALL THE LESIONS
REMAINED STABLE, AND THERE IS
NO NEW LESION CAN BE IDENTIFIED.
AND WE WOULD LIKE
TO CONTINUE TO SEE
THIS KIND
OF A GOOD RESULT.
Mark: FOR NOW,
JUST THE FACT
THAT YOU'VT BAY
AND NOT HAVE ANY OTHER NEW ONES
IN THIS FIRST SCAN
REALLY SHOWS YOU THAT YOU HAD
A REAL EFFECT ON THE DISEASE,
BECAUSE YOU WOULD
HAVE EXPECTED
THAT NOT ONLY WOULD THEY
HAVE INCREASED IN SIZE,
BUT THEY COULD HAVE ALSO
HAD NEW ONES GROW IN AS WELL.
YOU HAVEN'T REALLY SEEN,
LIKE, DRAMATIC CHANGES,
SUCH AS DISAPPEAR
OR ANYTHING,
BUT THAT'S BECAUSE
THAT'S TOO EARLY.
AND WE ARE GOING TO
CONTINUE TO LOOK AT THAT.
SO, NEXT C.T. SCAN,
2 MONTHS?
2 MONTHS FROM NOW.
OK.
RIGHT NOW, YOU KNOW,
KNOCK ON WOOD,
THINGS ARE PROGRESSING WELL.
ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU, DOCTOR.
THIS IS GOOD NEWS.
WE WERE ACTUALLY HAVING
AN EFFECT ON HIM,
WHERE WE'RE NOT TAKING AWAY,
YOU KNOW, HIS QUALITY OF LIFE.
Yen: SO THEN I'LL LEAVE
THIS FILM HERE.
HE'S NOT OUT
OF THE WOODS YET, OK?
HE'S STILL GOT
A LONG WAY TO GO. WE WON'T KNOW.
HE'S GOING TO CONTINUE
TO GET TREATMENT,
AND, YOU KNOW, EVERYONE
WILL KEEP THEIR FINGERS CROSSED
THAT, YOU KNOW, WE'LL
CONTINUE TO SEE EFFECTS.
Ray: THIS IS
THE BEGINNING.
THIS IS A BEGINNING.
YEAH.
Mark: AND IF YOU HAVE
ANY QUESTIONS...
I MEAN, THERE WAS
NO REACTION, NOTHING.
SO WE'LL GET
2 MORE INFUSIONS IN
NEXT TUESDAY
AND THE FOLLOWING TUESDAY.
INSERT THERAPEUTICS
IS THE COMPANY THAT WE FOUNDED
TO MAKE THE TRANSITION
FROM LABORATORY
TO EARLY CLINICAL TRIALS.
THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS
THAT HAVE TO BE DONE
NOT APPROPRIATE TO BE DONE
AT A UNIVERSITY,
LIKE, FOR EXAMPLE, THE GAZILLION
PAGES OF REGULATIONS
THAT WE'D NEED TO BE ABLE TO DO
TO TAKE IT THROUGH THE F.D.A.
AND SO WHEN YOU COME UP
WITH SOMETHING REALLY NEW,
YOU HAVE SEVERAL OPTIONS--
GO TAKE IT TO A BIG
PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY
AND JUST SAY, "HERE IT IS.
YOU GUYS GO TAKE IT."
OR THE OTHER IS--
THE APPROACH THAT WE LIKE IS,
YOU GO AND YOU START
A SMALL COMPANY.
Mary: WE TALKED ABOUT IT,
AND WE TALKED TO OTHER PEOPLE
WHO HAD STARTED COMPANIES,
AND I REMEMBER ONE COMMENT
THAT A WIFE SAID TO ME.
SHE SAID, "IS YOUR MARRIAGE
READY FOR IT?"
AND I WAS THINKING,
"YEAH. WELL, WHY NOT?"
YOU KNOW, WE GOT THROUGH CANCER,
AND WE GOT THROUGH THE TWINS,
AND WHAT'S...YOU KNOW, WHY WOULD
A COMPANY BE A PROBLEM?
IT WAS A ROUGH
DECADE, BELIEVE ME.
I FELT LIKE
A SINGLE MOM.
IT WAS 10 YEARS
OF MARK WORKING DAY AND NIGHT,
EITHER AT CALTECH
OR WITH THE COMPANY.
WE REALLY HAD
NO EXPERIENCE AT ALL.
WE STARTED FROM, YOU KNOW,
THE DONUT, FROM ZERO.
WE DIDN'T HAVE
THE RIGHT LAB.
THE RIGHT BACKGROUND.
BUT IT WAS LIKE,
JUST WITH, LIKE, TRACK
AND WITH GOING INTO
CHEMICAL ENGINEERING,
IT WAS ANOTHER
BIG CHALLENGE.
WITH IT-101, THE ENGINEERING
PART OF THE PROBLEM
WAS TO COMBINE
A POTENT CANCER DRUG
WITH MATERIALS THAT GET IT
RIGHT INTO CANCER CELLS.
WE WANTED TO BUILD SOMETHING
LIKE A CUSTOM HOTROD.
THERE WERE PARTS
THAT PEOPLE KNEW OF,
BUT WE PUT THEM
TOGETHER IN A WAY
THAT NO ONE WAS ABLE
TO DO IN THE PAST.
THE BASIC BUILDING BLOCK
OF IT-101 IS A SUGAR.
IT'S CALLED CYCLODEXTRIN,
AND IT WAS FIRST
DISCOVERED IN 1891.
IT'S NOW USED TO MAKE
LOW-CHOLESTEROL FOODS
AND TO MAKE HOUSEHOLD PRODUCTS,
LIKE ODOR NEUTRALIZERS.
BUT A SUGAR POLYMER
IS NOT GOING TO KILL A TUMOR.
THE CANCER-KILLING POWER
COMES FROM A PLANT EXTRACT
PRODUCED FROM
THE CAMPTOTHECA TREE,
WHICH GROWS MAINLY
IN CHINA AND TIBET.
ITS MEDICINAL PROPERTIES
HAVE BEEN KNOWN
FOR HUNDREDS OF YEARS
TO TREAT THINGS
LIKE PSORIASIS, COLDS,
AND STOMACH AILMENTS.
CAMPTOTHECA LEAVES
PRODUCE A MOLECULE
CALLED CAMPTOTHECIN.
IT'S EXTREMELY EFFECTIVE
AGAINST A LOT OF DIFFERENT
TYPES OF CANCERS.
BUT IT'S ALSO
EXTREMELY TOXIC.
SO CAMPTOTHECIN CAN'T BE
USED IN HUMANS
UNLESS YOU FIGURE OUT A WAY
TO KEEP IT FROM BEING SO TOXIC
UNTIL IT GETS
INTO THE TUMOR,
WHICH IS EXACTLY WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN YOU ATTACH IT
TO THE CYCLODEXTRIN POLYMER.
WHEN WE PUT IT IN WATER,
THESE POLYMER STRANDS
ZIP TOGETHER AND BECOME
THE IT-101 NANOPARTICLE.
THE CAMPTOTHECIN IS
CHEMICALLY TRANSFORMED,
MAKING IT WAY LESS TOXIC.
IF IT WORKS,
THE WHOLE THING
IS GOING TO BE
LIKE A TROJAN HORSE.
LOOKS LIKE A SUGAR, BUT INSIDE
IT'S A LETHAL WEAPON.
Forman: MARK RECOGNIZED
IT WAS A CHEMISTRY PROBLEM.
HE SAW THE CHEMISTRY
OF THE DRUG.
HE KNEW THE CHEMISTRY
OF THE POLYMER.
HIS INSIGHT WAS
TO FIGURE OUT A WAY
TO PUT THOSE TWO THINGS
TOGETHER IN A WAY
THAT NOBODY HAD THOUGHT
TO DO BEFORE.
Mark: THE OBJECTIVE
OF PHASE-ONE TRIAL
IS ALL ABOUT SAFETY.
BUT IN TODAY'S WORLD,
YOU'RE DOING
EVERYTHING YOU CAN
TO SEE IF, IN FACT,
YOU'RE HAVING EFFICACY.
IF WE DON'T SEE INDICATIONS
THAT THIS THING
IS GOING TO WORK IN A PHASE-ONE,
EVERYONE WOULD KIND OF GO,
"WHY GO TO A PHASE-TWO?"
SO IT WOULD BE ALL OVER.
10 YEARS AND OUT.
[LAUGHTER]
I HAVE TO THINK FORWARD.
HE'S ALWAYS
THINKING POSITIVE.
WHAT DO YOU EXPECT
TO FIND OUT
FROM THE RESULTS
TOMORROW?
TOMORROW, MAINLY TO SEE
IF IT'S IMPROVED,
THE CANCER, IS TREATING IT
OR IS STABLE.
THE LAST RESULT,
IT WAS STABLE.
I WANT TO SEE IT
STILL STABLE
OR IT'S ACTUALLY
TREATING THE CANCER.
THE C.T. SCAN SHOWS
ALL THAT, RIGHT?
YEAH.
YOU SAW ME LAST YEAR.
YOU SAW ME A YEAR BEFORE.
WHAT DO YOU THINK?
A BIG IMPROVEMENT.
YOU LOOK
MUCH HEALTHIER.
YEAH? SHE'S THE GIRL
THAT WORRIES TOO MUCH FOR ME.
IT'S HARD BEING ON
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE WORLD.
TOMORROW,
I WANT YOU TO MEET
A VERY INTERESTING PERSON, OK?
HIS NAME IS DR. MARK DAVIS.
HE WORKS FOR THE CALTECH.
I'VE TOLD YOU THAT BEFORE.
HIS WIFE HAD BREAST CANCER,
AND SHE WAS TAKING CHEMO,
AND SHE SAID, "NO, IT HAS TO
BE BETTER THAN THIS."
SHE ENCOURAGED HIM TO DO
SOMETHING ABOUT IT,
AND HE DID IT.
AND I THINK THAT'S WHY
I RESPECT HER
AND HIM SO MUCH.
YOU KNOW WHAT I'M SAYING?
EVERYBODY LIVES AND DIES,
BUT SOME PEOPLE LEAVE
AN IMPRESSION FOR GENERATIONS.
YOU KNOW, THEY'LL NEVER
BE FORGOTTEN.
AND THIS IS
ONE OF THE STORIES.
Mark: THERE'S ALWAYS REASON
TO QUESTION YOURSELF.
YOU KNOW, YOU TAKE IT
ONE STEP AT A TIME.
YOU HAVE TO LEARN TO JUST
STAY CALM, RUN THE COURSE,
IN HOPES THAT, YOU KNOW,
WE CAN DO BETTER.
Ray: I FINISHED
THE SIXTH MONTH.
IT'S AN IMPORTANT DAY.
Lisa: GOT BUTTERFLIES.
I'M JUST THINKING ABOUT
CALLING MY SIBLINGS
TO LET THEM KNOW
THE RESULTS AND...
YOU UNDERSTAND, LISA,
THAT THIS IS ONLY RESEARCH?
OK?
SO NOTHING FOOLPROOF.
YEAH, I KNOW.
I KNOW.
SO BE PREPARED
FOR ANY NEWS, OK?
WE'VE GOT TO TAKE
THE BAD WITH THE GOOD.
YEAH, I KNOW.
CITY OF HOPE.
HI, RAY.
HOW ARE YOU?
HI, DOC.
GOOD TO SEE YOU.
YOU KNOW MY WIFE.
YOU KNOW MY DAUGHTER?
THAT YOUR DAUGHTER
FROM NEW ZEALAND?
GLAD TO MEET YOU.
TODAY, AS YOU KNOW,
YOU FINISH 6 MONTHS
OF THE TREATMENT,
AND I WOULD LIKE TO
SHOW YOU THE RESULTS.
WHAT WE ARE LOOKING AT
IN PARTICULAR
IS YOUR LUNG LESION.
YOU SEE THESE DOTS?
YES.
THESE MULTIPLE DOTS,
BOTH SIDES OF THE LUNG,
AS YOU KNOW BEFORE,
AND INTERESTINGLY ENOUGH,
TO SHOW YOU
SEVERAL THINGS.
FIRST, THERE'S NOT
ANY NEW LESION COME OUT,
WHICH IS GOOD.
THAT'S VERY GOOD,
YEAH.
YEAH. AND THE SECOND THING IS
THAT THEY'RE ALL VERY STABLE.
NONE OF THEM SHOW
ANY ENLARGEMENT AT ALL.
THAT'S ALSO GOOD.
THE THIRD THING IS, THERE'S
SOME LESION HAS BEEN CAVITATED.
THAT MEANS
THEY'RE LIKE A HOLE NOW.
SO THIS USED TO BE
A TUMOR MASS
AS A SOLID TUMOR MASS.
NOW THE INSIDE
BECOMES A HOLE.
SAME THING HERE.
THAT USUALLY MEANS THAT THE
INSIDE OF THE TUMOR IS DYING.
SO THAT IS
A VERY GOOD SIGN FOR US.
Ray: WHEN I JOINED
THE STUDY,
I HAD TUMORS
ALL OVER MY LUNGS.
BOTH LUNGS WERE COMPLETELY
COVERED WITH HUNDREDS OF TUMORS.
RIGHT NOW, MOST OF THE TUMORS
ARE HEALING.
THE REST OF THEM
IS DORMANT, HAS STOPPED DEAD.
EXCELLENT. THAT'S REALLY
EXCELLENT RESULTS HERE. YEAH.
I'M HAPPY
WITH THAT, TOO.
YEAH, WE ARE
HAPPY FOR YOU.
THANKS.
THAT'S VERY GOOD RESULT.
WOULDN'T HOPE FOR
ANY BETTER THAN THIS
AT THIS STAGE
IN 6 MONTHS.
AH. IS THAT GOOD
NEWS OR WHAT?
SEE? I TOLD YOU.
TIME TO CELEBRATE,
RIGHT?
NOW YOU CAN
CALL, OK?
LUCKY. YEAH?
STOP IT.
HI, EVERYBODY.
HI.
HEY,
HOW ARE YOU?
GOOD TO SEE YOU.
YOU KNOW MY WIFE.
THIS IS MY DAUGHTER
FROM NEW ZEALAND.
DID YOU SEE
THE CHANGE
FROM LAST TIME
TILL NOW?
STILL SMILING.
THAT'S GREAT.
I GOT UP A LOT
OF WEIGHT NOW.
OH, MORE WEIGHT?
WHEN I CAME HERE,
WHEN YOU MET ME,
I WAS TIRED,
I COULDN'T WORK.
RIGHT NOW,
IT'S ALL THAT GONE.
SO I'VE BEEN LIVING
A VERY ACTIVE LIFE
FOR THE LAST
4 OR 5 MONTHS.
YOUR HARD WORK
WASN'T FOR NOTHING.
NO. NOT AT ALL.
YEAH. HOW DO YOU FEEL
ABOUT THIS RESULT?
I FEEL GREAT NOW,
BECAUSE, YOU KNOW,
NOT ONLY YOU, BUT THERE
ARE MANY OTHER PEOPLE
NOW ON THIS.
WE'RE GETTING A LOT
OF EXPERIENCE NOW WITH IT
AND SO FORTH, SO WE'RE ALL
PRETTY HAPPY ABOUT IT.
YEAH. A THOUSAND
SHARES ARE MINE.
[LAUGHTER]
1,000 SHARES IS MINE
IN THIS COMPANY.
[LAUGHTER]
HE'S A BUSINESS GUY.
IF I'M GOING TO
LIVE LONGER,
I'M GOING TO NEED
MONEY, OK?
LISTEN,
KEEP IT UP, OK?
REALLY GREAT
TO SEE YOU AGAIN.
VERY NICE TO SEE YOU.
VERY NICE TO MEET YOU.
AND SAY HI
TO YOUR WIFE, TOO.
BECAUSE SOMETHING
HAPPENED GOOD.
OK? DON'T
FORGET THAT.
ALL RIGHT. GREAT.
OK.
AMAZING THAT ONE MINUTE,
I WAS LOOKING AT MY OWN DEMISE,
AND NOW I'M SITTING HERE,
AND I KNOW NOW
THAT I DO HAVE
TIME ON MY HAND,
ESPECIALLY WHEN YOU SEE YOUR
DEATH RIGHT IN FRONT OF YOU.
YOU OK?
OK.
Yen: BEFORE THE START
OF THE TREATMENT,
THE LIFE EXPECTANCY
IS ABOUT 3 MONTHS OR EVEN LESS.
NOW WITH THIS KIND
OF RESULTS,
WE PREDICT THAT HE SHOULD HAVE
A MUCH LONGER LIFE EXPECTANCY,
AND WE SHOULD CONTINUE TO SEE
HE'S GETTING GOOD RESPONSE.
[INDISTINCT CONVERSATION
AND LAUGHTER]
WHAT KIND OF WOMAN
WANTS TO MARRY THIS GUY?
LET'S GO AHEAD AND BOOK
TICKETS FOR ALASKA.
HOW MANY FAMILIES ARE GOING?
15 SO FAR?
Mark: MY PERSONAL HOPE
FOR RAY IS THAT, YOU KNOW,
ULTIMATELY HIS TUMORS
WOULD GO AWAY,
BUT I MEAN, THAT'S ASKING
A HUGE, HUGE AMOUNT.
BUT, YOU KNOW, I'M GREEDY.
I WANT TO GO FOR EVERYTHING.
I AM A SPRINTER,
NOT A LONG-DISTANCE RUNNER,
AND SO THIS IS NOT
A FAST RACE.
THIS HAS BEEN A 10-YEAR,
DRAWN-OUT PROCESS
TO GET JUST
WHERE WE'RE AT,
AND WE STILL HAVE
MANY YEARS TO GO
BEFORE WE WOULD CONSIDER
WE'RE ANYWHERE NEAR
THE END OF THE ROAD.
Mary: I GUESS MARK HAS ALWAYS
SOLVED A LOT OF PROBLEMS.
YOU JUST...YOU MENTION
EVEN CASUALLY SOMETHING,
LIKE, TURN TO YOUR HUSBAND
AND SAY, "GO CURE CANCER."
YOU KNOW, AND HE WENT
AND IS DOING IT.
WHEN I ASKED MARK THIS,
I ALWAYS THOUGHT OF IT
AS, LIKE, A LOVE STORY,
BECAUSE HE SAW ME
BEING SO SICK
AND HE WANTED TO
MAKE ME FEEL BETTER.
[LAUGHTER]
TO THE HEALTH
AND PROSPERITY OF MR. RAY.
YES!
TO SEE IT GOING INTO A PATIENT
AND ACTUALLY WORKING,
IT'S JUST INCREDIBLE.
SEE THAT?
Ray: THIS IS THE VERY FIRST DAY.
I WAS THE FIRST HUMAN.
AND FROM A SELFISH
POINT OF VIEW,
I THINK, OK,
IF MY DAUGHTER GETS SICK,
I HAVE A DRUG
THAT MY HUSBAND DEVELOPED
TO GIVE TO HER.
STILL CURIOUS?
GET MORE AT THIRTEEN.ORG--
UNCUT INTERVIEWS,
WEB-EXCLUSIVE VIDEO,
AND MORE "CURIOUS" STORIES.
WE'RE "CURIOUS"
AT THIRTEEN.ORG.
CAPTIONING MADE POSSIBLE BY
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
--www.ncicap.org--NING INSTE
"CURIOUS" IS MADE POSSIBLE
BY TIAA CREF.
WELCOME TO powerof.org.
WELCOME TO TIAA CREF.
WE'RE A $400 BILLION
FINANCIAL SERVICES .org
WITH THE HEART
OF A NONPROFIT,
SERVING THOSE
WHO SERVE THE GREATER GOOD.
WE ARE COMMITTED
TO PROVIDING THEM
HONEST, OBJECTIVE
RETIREMENT ADVICE.
THAT'S powerof.org.
THAT'S TIAA CREF.